---
date: '2021-10-08T12:39:14'
tags: ['qmk', 'via']
title: 
published: true
description:
aliases:
references:
---
	
# Configuring my Abasic with QMK
I had 4 main objectives:
1. configure the OLED with Bongo Cat that triggered on each keypress (i.e. not driven by my WPM count)
2. RGB lighthing controlled by the active layer
3. Modifiers on my home row that didn't trigger while typing fast
4. [VIA compatible](202110081239-QMK-MacOS.md#VIA%20Compatible)

The [Abasic website](https://kiwikey.vn/wanderland/) only had the following pre-configured firmwares:
- default (no via, no oled)
- VIA firmware (VIA enabled, no OLED)
- VIA & OLED firmware

The third option seemed like the sweet spot, however objectives 2 and 3 can't be achieved with the VIA configurator. So QMK is really needed, and for that, you need access to the `config.h` and `keymap.c` files which the Abasic website didn't upload for the third option. Hence, I needed to build and compile my own custom firmware.

## Setup build environment

 QMK was not setup in my Mac yet so I followed the [official guide](https://beta.docs.qmk.fm/tutorial/newbs_getting_started) for setting up my build environment. Key to remember here is the default keymap name you set:

> You can also set your default keymap name. Most people use their GitHub username here, and we recommend that you do too.
> ```
> qmk config user.keymap=<github_username>
> ```

In my case it's `neldeles`. This is important because after you follow the **Create a New Keymap** step, it will create a firmware folder in `qmk_firmware/keyboards/keyboard/keymaps/<github_username>`. When you compile a firmware for `keyboard` it will be stored there by default.

## Building, compiling, then flashing

Once that is setup you can start building your firmware. The most intuitive steps for me are:
1. Use [QMK Configurator](https://config.qmk.fm/) to map your keybindings. Once done, save it as a `.json`
2. Open up Terminal and navigate to the directory where you saved the `.json`. 
3. Once in the directory, convert it to a `.c` file: `qmk json2c -o keymap.c json_filename`
4. This will generate a `keymap.c` file. If this is your first ever `keymap.c` file for that keyboard, you can just move it to the firmware folder mentioned in [Setup build environment](202110081239-QMK-MacOS.md#Setup%20build%20environment). If it isn't your first `keymap.c` and you've already added custom QMK code to your `keymap.c`, just copy paste the code.
5. Once you've copy pasted the code/moved `keymap.c` to the correct directory, compile it in Terminal: `qmk compile -kb kiwikey/wanderland -km neldeles`. I've set up an Alfred snippet for this keyboard: `.abasiccompile`
6. Open up QMK toolbox and load in the generated `.hex` file from step 5. Hit the reset button in your keyboard then flash it.

Let's now move on to the specific code changes needed for our 4 objectives. 

## Objective 1: Bongo Oled

For bongo cat I'm using the code I found in [this](https://github.com/filterpaper/qmk_userspace) repo. I [forked](https://github.com/neldeles/qmk_userspace) it just in case. Instructions are found as a comment in the [oled-bongocat.c](hook://file/4FpHSb1F6?p=YWJhc2ljL015IEZpcm13YXJl&n=oled-bongocat.c) file. I've already made the needed changes in the file. For posterity, important ones to take note of are as follows. 

> Otherwise add the following integer variable and 'if' statement inside 'process_record_user()' in keymap.c:
>	
>	uint32_t tap_timer = 0;
> 
>   bool process_record_user(uint16_t keycode, keyrecord_t *record)
>   { if (record->event.pressed) { tap_timer = timer_read32(); }}

In your `keymap.c`, that would look like this:
```c
#ifdef OLED_ENABLE
uint32_t tap_timer = 0; // Timer for OLED animation
bool process_record_user(uint16_t const keycode, keyrecord_t *record) {
	if (record->event.pressed) {
		tap_timer = timer_read32();
	}

	return true; // Continue with unmatched keycodes
}
#endif
```

>  3 Left and right aligned Bongocat is default. To save space:
>  - Add 'OPT_DEFS += -DLEFTCAT' into rules.mk
>  - Or 'OPT_DEFS += -DRIGHTCAT' into rules.mk

In my `rules.mk` I added `OPT_DEFS += -DLEFTCAT`. The cat is now facing west.

> 5 The 'oled_task_user()' calls 'render_mod_status()' for secondary OLED.
>      It can be replaced with your own function, or delete the 'else' line.

We just deleted the line mentioned here.

## Objective 2: RGB per layer
I added this to my `keymap.c`:
```c
void eeconfig_init_user(void) {  // EEPROM is getting reset!
  // use the non noeeprom versions, to write these values to EEPROM too
  rgblight_enable(); // Enable RGB by default
  rgblight_mode(RGBLIGHT_MODE_RAINBOW_SWIRL); // set to breathing by default
}

layer_state_t layer_state_set_user(layer_state_t state) {
  rgblight_config_t rgblight_config;
  switch(biton32(state)) {
  case 1:
    // Red
    rgblight_enable_noeeprom(); 
    rgblight_mode(RGBLIGHT_MODE_STATIC_LIGHT);
    rgblight_sethsv_noeeprom(HSV_RED);
    break;
  case 2:
    // Blue
    rgblight_enable_noeeprom();
    rgblight_mode(RGBLIGHT_MODE_STATIC_LIGHT);
    rgblight_sethsv_noeeprom(HSV_GREEN);
    break;
  default:
    // White
    //Read RGB Light State
    rgblight_config.raw = eeconfig_read_rgblight();
    //If enabled, set white
    if (rgblight_config.enable) {
        rgblight_mode(RGBLIGHT_MODE_RAINBOW_SWIRL + 3);
    } else { //Otherwise go back to disabled
        rgblight_disable_noeeprom();
    }
    break;
}
return state;
}
```

## Objective 3

This one was a bit tricky. But I've now fully wrapped my head around it. Important concepts are:
- [Mod Tap](https://beta.docs.qmk.fm/using-qmk/advanced-keycodes/mod_tap)
- [Tap Hold configuration](https://beta.docs.qmk.fm/using-qmk/software-features/tap_hold)

Mod Tap allows you to map a key to a modifier on hold, and keypress on tap. You can map this in QMK configurator. QMK treats this differently from a `LT` with regards to Tap Hold configuration settings.

> By default the tap-or-hold decision for Mod Tap keys strongly prefers the hold action. If you press a Mod Tap key, then press another key while still holding the Mod Tap key down, the Mod Tap press will be handled as a modifier hold even if the Mod Tap key is then released within the tapping term, and irrespective of the order in which those keys are released. Using options such as `PERMISSIVE_HOLD` or `HOLD_ON_OTHER_KEY_PRESS` will not affect the functionality of Mod Tap keys in a major way. 
> 
> If the `IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT` option is enabled, Mod Tap keys are no longer treated as a special case, and their behavior will match the behavior of other dual-role keys such as Layer Tap. Then the behavior of Mod Tap keys can be further tuned using other options such as `PERMISSIVE_HOLD` or `HOLD_ON_OTHER_KEY_PRESS`.

^8kbszx

Now the "special" sauce are the tap hold configuration options. Without this, the default is 200ms i.e. >200ms considered a hold. 

I added the following in the `config.h` file:
```c
/* tap hold configuration options 
 * PERMISSIVE_HOLD: makes tap and hold keys trigger the hold if another key is pressed before releasing, 
 *   even if it hasn't hit the TAPPING_TERM
*/
#define TAPPING_TERM 500
#define PERMISSIVE_HOLD
#define PERMISSIVE_HOLD_PER_KEY
#define IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT
```

Simplified explanations can be found [here](https://beta.docs.qmk.fm/developing-qmk/qmk-reference/config_options#features-that-can-be-disabled). I've extracted the ones I've used below
-   `#define TAPPING_TERM 200`
    -   how long before a tap becomes a hold, if set above 500, a key tapped during the tapping term will turn it into a hold too
-   `#define PERMISSIVE_HOLD`
    -   makes tap and hold keys trigger the hold if another key is pressed before releasing, even if it hasn't hit the `TAPPING_TERM`
    -   See [Permissive Hold](/using-qmk/software-features/tap_hold#permissive-hold) for details
-   `#define PERMISSIVE_HOLD_PER_KEY`
    -   enabled handling for per key `PERMISSIVE_HOLD` settings
-   `#define IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT`
    -   makes it possible to do rolling combos (zx) with keys that convert to other keys on hold, by enforcing the `TAPPING_TERM` for both keys.
    -   See [Ignore Mod Tap Interrupt](/using-qmk/software-features/tap_hold#ignore-mod-tap-interrupt) for details

### IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT

Why did we add `#define IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT`? Because of [this](202110081239-QMK-MacOS.md#^8kbszx). So now our TAPPING_TERM and PERMISSIVE_HOLD settings apply to our mod taps. Issues like <kbd>j</kbd> <kbd>k</kbd> rolling combo triggering Context switch is now avoided.

### PERMISSIVE_HOLD_PER_KEY
In our `config.c` we add the ff:
```c
#ifdef PERMISSIVE_HOLD_PER_KEY
bool get_permissive_hold(uint16_t keycode, keyrecord_t *record) {
    switch (keycode) {
        case RALT_T(KC_J):
            // Do not select the hold action when another key is tapped.
            return false;
        case RALT_T(KC_R):
            // Do not select the hold action when another key is tapped.
            return false;
        default:
            // Immediately select the hold action when another key is tapped.
            return true;
    }
}
#endif
```

This also helps with the [rolling combo](202110081239-QMK-MacOS.md#IGNORE_MOD_TAP_INTERRUPT) issue desribed here.

## VIA Compatible
To make it VIA compatible, just need to create a `rules.mk` file in the `wanderland/keymaps/neldeles` directory. The file only contains `VIA_ENABLE = yes`.

Why do we need to create a standalone `rules.mk` instead of appending that code to `wanderland/rules.mk`? So that the default isn't VIA enabled as suggested in the [official docs](https://caniusevia.com/docs/configuring_qmk).

From my understanding this is the only step needed because the [changes to the keyboard directory's config.h](https://caniusevia.com/docs/configuring_qmk#changes-to-keyboard-directorys-configh) has already been configured by default.

## Bonus: Minimizing firmware
I followed the advice in this [blog](https://thomasbaart.nl/2018/12/01/reducing-firmware-size-in-qmk/) and [reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/MechanicalKeyboards/comments/aqmd5f/firmware_is_too_large_qmk_firmware/).

# Footer

---

Related: 