# To index.js or not to index.js
> In Node you can create a file like `src/foo/index.js`, and then when another file imports it they can leave off the `index` part and simply `require('src/foo')`. This makes it ever so slightly easier to import the model vs. if you named the file "foo.js" and thus had to `require('src/foo/foo')`.
> 
> But at the same time if you take advantage of this you will wind up with a whole lot of files with the same name. If you use an editor that let's you open files by name hundreds of `index.js` files will make that feature slower, and when you're debugging in the browser all you'll see in the stack, at least until you hover over it, is `index.js`.
> 
> So on one hand you have the minor convenience of writing `require` or `import` statements with one less directory in the path. On the other hand you have the minor inconvenience of it sometimes being harder to find the right file or know which file is which.
> 
> So where do you weigh in? What is the "best practice" regarding index.js?

Reply:

> Index.js is not about having to type out slightly shorter file names.
>
> It is about encapsulation.
>
> The idea is that your directories should have files and classes or services or whatever you want it have but everything this is public should be exported or exposed in the index.js
>
> The idea is to never require a file from inside another directory directly as whatever it exposes should be that "package" 's internals and are private.
>
> Of course this is not enforced in JavaScript, but it is important for writing clean, well organised code.
>
> Of course on small projects it is annoying. Especially if you only have one or two files.

# Footer
---
Source: https://www.reddit.com/r/javascript/comments/7rv221/to_indexjs_or_not_to_indexjs/
Keywords: #javascript 
Related: